we're here representing the
minorities
I uh Our Guest is uh most of you know uh
began life as sedata
mukui he then became doctor uh sedata
mukui and more recently he has
become uh a prizewinning author and
filmmaker Dr sedata
Muki uh and I don't know how many of you
have read his sparkling
iridescent extraordinary
biography of the history of cancer
emperor of all maladies but if you
haven't you owe it to yourselves uh to
do so and there are copies outside and
we're going to talk about the book and
the Genesis of the book and then sedata
is going to um show a clip uh from uh
the movie um that he made with the very
famous documentary maker Ken Burns and
then we're going to talk about um the
state of Science and also um he's going
to uh about his new books
plural uh because before the word author
he is shortly to introduce another word
in his overall introduction which is the
word prolific um so
um Sid I don't know how you manage this
all he was telling me just now um that
he actually was in the hospital um last
night and I have no idea at all
how first of all you ever had the itch
to pick up the pen and second how in
this extraordinarily busy day that you
must have every day of the week
you found the time to actually write a
book well thank you for for all those
kind words um I think the word itch is a
nice word uh I think most writers and I
think most creative people do the things
that they do because they can't do
otherwise I think the you know it's just
as compulsive as something itching in
your back you can't get it out until
it's scratched um and so for me that
itch uh at least when I was starting out
that itch was the itch that I had felt
when people would come up to patients
people that I love people I knew my own
family members would come up to me and
say well you're working on cancer we
just don't know anything about it we
have no idea where we are we don't know
how we got here where give us a road map
um and I thought to myself well you know
I'm I've spent 10 years at that point of
time 10 odd years studying this vast uh
subject there must be a road map U there
must be a landscape there must be uh a
Google dock of cancer and I couldn't
find one there was no was was there
anything that came close or other people
who try people had tried I mean I would
say interestingly people had tried both
in the metaphorical sense Susan sag
famously in the metaphorical sense had
tried to capture the history or the
biography of an illness um there was um
a couple of books not on cancer there
were a couple of books that were really
important road maps for me uh Landmark
books I'll tell you both of them I refer
to them in the book one was Randy schilz
book um which uh ferocious ferocious
book about the very first days of the
AIDS epidemic um and the biography of
that disease you know um and the and if
you haven't read it uh and the band
played on is the name of the book um I
would recommend everyone not because not
only because it was such an important
historical moment but it's an
encapsulated history of innovation and
the barriers to Innovation it's an
encapsulated history of what happens
when human beings suddenly face the kind
of cataclysm that Camu described in the
plague um you know
um um the historian Tony jut once told
me you know Albert K's book the plague
is about the plague in the the same way
that King Lear is about a king named
Lear um because of
course formally it's about the plag but
really it's about human history and
psychology and psyche and Trauma and all
of those other things that all gets
condensed down to a single moment when a
a bacterium gets Unleashed into a
population so there was Randy schilz
book and then there was um the other
book that I thought was remarkable that
was the making of the atomic bomb which
I think everyone who is is interested in
technology today uh making of the atomic
bomb is also a landmark but it it is
also about the making of the atomic bomb
in the same way that King Lear is about
a king named Lear um it is about what
happened to human history what happened
to science when all of a sudden we
discovered how to break open the atom so
more than any book on disease or cancer
Etc these two Landmark works of
non-fiction were sort of and Susan sag
work were three things that I went back
to over and over again but you were also
making your you had several day jobs you
were making your way as a clinician as
well and how did you find the time to
compose or write the book you know I
that the um the the nice thing about
time is that you lose the memory of time
um so you can you can have convenient
Amnesia about how you spend your time
but if I remember correctly I when I was
writing the book I would come home in
the evening evening we didn't have
children then uh which uh which can be a
lovely blessing although as you know uh
well it's like EVN War said the greatest
enemy to Art is the sight of the
perambulator in the
hallway but so I would come back home
and write at night and I still do um I I
figured out certain habits um I have a
very peculiar writing habits I like to
write in bed um so I would just
essentially I still do so I I I I was
when I started my new book um I was now
in my new office and it's a you know
sparkling new office Etc and for the
longest time I couldn't write at all and
I couldn't figure out why I kept
scratching my head saying why am I
having such a writers block and I
realized it's because there was no bed
so I put a bed in my office um so that's
the secret to WR his block I think
anyway I mean you know the question is
how do you make time how do you find the
time I just don't know I don't have a
great answer to the question is the
bottom line I you make time you if you
have creative projects if it's an itch
as you as you're calling it time
eventually gets manufactured you know
you just make it uh I don't have a
Genius answer to that except to say it
the fact that itches need to be
scratched and when they need to be
scratched they need to be scratched as
you know and uh for me that it was so
important that was so personal it was so
um compulsive that it had to be
scratched and if that meant staying up
the hours in the in the night to finish
a book it meant staying up the hours to
finish aook and and as you developed the
book and thought more about it and got
I'm sure there were things that uh what
were the things that surprised you as
you scoped out this whole history of
this evolution of this multi-headed
disease well I I would answer it in two
different ways one of them has to do
with the craft of writing books but the
other one has to do with think the craft
of thinking about science and they're
related but not the same kind of project
so the craft of thinking about science
is that
and and you know you spend your life
immersed in the daytoday I'm I'm a
laboratory scientist I still like to sit
in the laboratory picking up a pipet and
pushing specimens onto other specimens
or mixing Solutions with other Solutions
or as uh Charles Lamb called it making
nasty smells uh so I think the problem
from this from from being a scientist is
how to look outwards and backwards uh
here you are in the thick of things
you're you're a sort of soldier in the
trenches as it were but then you're also
asked you have to be asked what's the
meaning of doing these small activities
and you're doing how do they stretch
together and Link together so in in
other words science and medicine are
fundamentally about storytelling it's a
fundamental task of science and medicine
to be able to tell stories uh we need
those every person who is a who's an
important scientist I think has made
important contributions to the world has
the capacity I think to understand those
contributions in terms of very formal
storytelling you should be able to tell
someone a lay person you you should be
able to describe to yourself what you're
doing why it's important and how it fits
into that history and so much of the
book was learning how to do that and
crafting it in a way that was sensible
not only to me and to other scientists
creating a road map for the future for a
problem that I think was of immense
importance but also learning to do that
from qua quas science learning to do
that not only as a non-fiction writer
but learning to do that creating a road
map for oneself saying to myself what is
my story what is our story where are we
in this long process how do we pinpoint
the uh Landmark destinations and how do
we move forward what's what does the
future look like now had you shown the
book to anybody before you finished it
or what was the reaction to the
manuscript when well I have an
interesting story about how I mean again
interesting story about the process as
well uh many people here have written
amazing books you can see a whole uh you
can you you can find a whole curriculum
as you walk outside um in in the hallway
but my process was very unique I
couldn't for the life of me and I still
cannot I can't write a book proposal um
because it seems to be like a simulacrum
of the of the object itself it's like
saying I'm going to do this but this is
what it's going to look like and it
seemed to be some of an absurd idea
because unless you show what you're
doing
um I guess I suppose it comes from me
being a scientist unless you show what
you're doing it's sort of empty it
doesn't exist in the real world so I
tried for the longest time I I you know
as seriously as possible I tried to
write a book proposal and it was
completely empty and so one day I
decided this was several years ago one
day I said I'm just going to start
writing I'm going to start writing I'm
begin with the first word I'm a very
linear writer I begin I I don't patch
together pieces of books I start from
the first word and I end in the last
word um and um I said I'll just start
and when the book was about no less than
300 pages is when I first showed it to
people um and the reaction was very
binary uh it was
either you you really really think that
someone's going to read a 600 page book
about cancer you you you you're
sincerely think about that um one editor
told me why don't you write a kind of uh
um three greatest hits of cancer
research um and I said well that's not
really going to work I'm sorry thank you
for playing but um and then and then
eventually when it grew up to but the
other the other part of the binary curve
was um folks like Nan Graham who has
edited all my books is editing my new
books as well just said we will make
this work um in any manner possible um
she had edited a a um an amazing um book
on mental illness Andrew Solomon's book
um called the Noonday demon many of you
may have read the book or seen uh read
the book um and she said that we know
how to bring this kind of work into
public realm um and I trusted her and
that's what happened yeah your faith was
well placed now would you like to spend
a few minutes or a couple of minutes
setting up the excerpt from um the
documentary that AB yeah um so um let me
just preface this by saying the the book
uh was was transformed into into the
documentary very very quickly after
publication and it it's a reminder of
how um this sort of the world of um of
books and films I suspect works that
people who are interested in these
topics read voraciously Ken Burns reads
voraciously he's a voracious reader a
wonderful reader and um I was sitting in
my office may have been barely a month
or two months after the book was
originally published I got a phone call
a cold phone call um which is a reminder
you should always pick up your own phone
um uh from and it said I'm Ken Burns I'm
interested in making a film about your
book and I said I know who you
are um and I basically over the phone
agreed on the spot I said absolutely
I've seen every one of Ken's films uh
starting from Civil War all the way up
to you know at that time I think
prohibition had just come out um and I
said I would this would be a this would
be an amazing collaboration um no one as
far as I know had done this kind of
project before using cancer any disease
we talked about AIDS a little bit as a
lens by which to see human history or
American history in particular um Ken
was just the perfect person to bring
that challenge up okay so that was the
setup um now going into the clip itself
um there was one there were a couple of
artistic decisions so I basically
co-wrote the script um with several
people mainly with Jeffrey Ward who who
led the entire script writing process
but um but one of the crucial uh
decisions is that even for Ken it was a
departure from the standard format of
film making cuz here was something that
was not just Civil War kind of History
um when we first said when we first sat
down and said you know this is also a
story of a civil war um except one that
happens to be in your own body um it is
it has that kind of um resonance for
many people and will for many people in
the world it also needs to be a future
road map so that's the second piece of
it but most importantly uh there had to
be an element in which the historical
realm which can is a Master at had to be
continued into the current realm so we
thought that we would follow real
patients in real time an incredible
generosity on the ACT from from the
standpoints of patients would follow
them in real time and meld or melt their
stories into the larger Narrative of the
film this was an incredibly complicated
task in terms of filming because we were
following people from Day Zero we were
following people prospectively and
anyone who's done film making it's an
incredible challenge because you don't
know what's coming next you don't there
is no story because the story is coming
out in front of you as it were and you
can only script that story in retrospect
um so I'm going to show you one clip
from the film which I think we we try to
do that I'm not going to set it up
anymore because it's going to give parts
of it away but we begin basically with
an with an with an idea that was
formulated in the 1880s um about surgery
and cancer and the body really an idea
of the of the body really an idea that
comes to us from the medieval conception
of the body and then we move forward
into a real life case and and and the
way that these two intersect interact I
think is an important moment I should
also tell you that this very clip this
very idea will come back in the film and
as it does in the book will come back
you know four hours later in the film in
the book The idea of what lengths do we
go to or what lengths can we go to in
science and medicine to heal or cure
someone is there a limit what does what
does radical mean what does a radical
procedure mean what does a radical
Invasion of the Body mean if the end
point is to try to cure someone can you
walk them as it were into The Crucible
of dying or near death to come out on
the other side having cured or healed
someone and what conviction does that
involve what kind of uh uh uh
vulnerabilities and liabilities does it
involve uh both from patients and
doctors
uh in order to bring in order to do that
so that's the little bit of the
background um I'll start the clip I'm
going to say one last thing is that uh I
even now when I watch the clips are very
very emotionally dense so I would prep
you for that um the only other thing
being that when they're stopped it's
sort of impossible to stop but we have
to stop at some point in time so um
let's just let's just do that
okay it rings through the history of
cancer over and over again there is no
treatment there is no treatment there is
no
treatment in 1855 a young German
biologist named Rudolph Vira stared down
the barrel of his microscope and fixed
on the honeycomb of structures that made
up a sample of
tissue others had named these structures
cells after the Spartan rooms in which
monks lived and
prayed virka had a revolutionary Theory
to explain cells
they were not only the basis of healthy
life but of
disease a cell he wrote is the ultimate
irreducible form of every living element
and from it emanate all the activities
of Life both in health and in
sickness as he studied cells under the
microscope he came to realize that there
wasn't some strange material that made
the cells but that every cell came from
a previous
cell once he pointed out that thesis
omnis cellular a cellular he called it
every cell from another
cell that changed the understanding of
what cancer
was cancer cells clearly came from cells
that weren't cancerous they clearly came
from perfectly normal cells that had
been
changed Vera's Discovery pointed to
surgery as the primary treatment for
most forms of cancer if tumors were
merely collections of abnormal cells it
should be possible to cut them from the
body with the Advent of anesthesia and
antisepsis with the Advent of clean
surgery uh surgeons could now attack
cancer with a real
bravado this is the the Golden Age of
cancer
surgery no one Champions surgery with
more single-minded purpose than a doctor
named William
holstead holstead entered the field of
medicine in 1868 because he did not want
to work in his father's clothing
business once he'd found surgery though
he'd found his
calling he was a dashing exciting
surgeon because of how quick he was
developed a great reputation
in New York
City from the beginning Hallstead was
known for his Innovative and complex
surgeries he seemed intent on pushing
himself and his patients to the Limit he
is addicted to Perfection he's addicted
to the idea that the reason that cancer
is not being appropriately treated is
because the surgeons aren't trying hard
enough if they only tried more if they
tried better if they were more more
perfect if they could deliver a more
perfect operation then in fact they
would cure more cutting more meant
curing
more in 1890 holstead became chief of
surgery at the new Johns Hopkins
Hospital in Baltimore where he
concentrated on patients with breast
cancer as he operated on more and more
women holstead confronted a puzzle that
had long mystified
surgeons even when the bre bre was
removed cancer could still reappear in
entirely new places in the
body holstead thought he understood
why he believed that stray cancer cells
had escaped at the margins of his
incisions his answer was to cut an Ever
widening Arc of
tissue Hallstead started with the idea
that cancer started in the breast and it
grew centrifugally it grew out from the
original cancer it had rud it had like
tentacles and that if you could just get
widely around it enough you could get it
all out and you could cure
it and so hul had got the idea what if I
remove the muscle underneath the breast
and then the muscle underneath that and
then the lymph nodes beyond that so he
was doing this excavation in people's
chests he was really uh pushing the
envelope how far could you go
with your
scalpel Hallstead called his procedure
the radical
momy radical after the Original Latin by
the
root but others took it for the more
common
meaning
extreme from a woman's standpoint it's
horrendous because you're left
completely
flat not only do you not have the breast
but you don't have your pectoral muscle
either so it's just
ribs and often you don't have a nice
fold in your armpit the way you normally
do because that muscle's taken as well
and so it's really ugly and very
[Music]
deforming despite the damage they caused
halstead's radical operations did
succeed in saving the lives of many of
his patients whose cancers had not yet
spread beyond the
breast when you think about removing the
amount of tissue he's removing and still
having decent results this is not a hack
[Music]
job people who have described watching
hallad operate uh speak of it in hushed
reverential tones it was like watching
you know a virtuoso violinist or or a
great
pianist there were very few people who
could do what Hallstead could do back
then and so every doctor every surgeon
turned their eyes to Baltimore to see
what the great Hallstead was
doing but there was a problem with
radical surgery whether it was for
cancer in the breast lung prostate or
any other
organ no matter how skilled the surgeon
or bold the operation a significant
number of patients still relapsed with
the disease elsewhere in their bodies as
if the cancer had leapfrogged the the
surgeon's
incisions clearly there was a limit to
what surgery could do once the cancer
had spread it was too
late halstead's approach did work for
some patients it was almost right but
was not the full answer and this idea
that you know you can take half truths
and you make full truths out of them and
then the logic of the field closes
because you say to yourself this is the
truth and therefore lies outside the
boundaries of being testable
[Music]
I was 6 or seven when I saw the show
MASH and it was so exciting and I felt
that that was something that I could do
and my mom was the person who told me
that I could do anything
my mom and dad didn't go to college but
when I said I wanted to be a surgeon at
7 they're like okay don't free don't
worry I always say that I'm the first
generation sort of post
segregation it was a time that my
parents felt that there was opportunity
and so that they had waited a long time
and so uh it meant for us that there was
a lot to
accomplish Dr Lori Wilson is a surgical
oncologist and the director of the
surgery residency program at Howard
University the fact that you could make
a difference in someone's life that
actually could save your life and that
by far I thought was one of the most
dramatic things about Surgical Oncology
right Dr Wilson specializes in breast
cancer in research as well as in her
practice right now the important thing
is to make sure that you're feeling well
and that you're doing well excited
you're excited and you're nervous and I
know that we can we can we can do that
to
you de breaths whenever we know that
cancer is the diagnosis we always want
to make sure that we give all s and that
you may not be cured and that your
cancer could progress to something that
could end your life couple of weeks
that's fine
all right I want to get a quick look um
just to examine you real quick to see if
I can feel anything so that we can watch
us as we move
forward all right in July
2013 Dr Wilson herself was diagnosed
with breast
cancer the first person that I call was
my
husband I told him that that the
diagnosis was cancer and he said I'll be
right
home can you feel anything I think the
thing that caught me off guard is that I
not only have breast cancer on one
breast I actually have breast cancer in
both breasts was just a very unusual way
for patients to be diagnosed all right
you may go ahead and get dressed and
we'll get you started to complicate
matters Lori has a different kind of
cancer in each breast on the right is a
particularly aggressive type type called
triple negative on the left the cancer
is a type that may be treatable by
chemotherapy but it has already spread
to her lymph
nodes it makes it more difficult to
treat and so um the statistics are are
worse you okay you don't want too happy
today no was just a little weepy today
the fear the unknown and wondering what
you're getting I think one of the
difficult Parts I'm having is with the
totality of the
diagnosis I can process I have breast
cancer but what the
long-term impact that maybe I'm having a
difficult time sort of processing
that so we're going to do a right
thyroid lobectomy she has soon after Her
diagnosis Lori shared the news with her
colleagues and
students this is one of the assistant
Chiefs that sent this to me why you I
instantly ask myself but I soon realize
that if there is anyone who can attack
this situation with the type of strength
and faith that is needed it is
you you give each and every resident
that you touch hope the hope that is
needed to resist the urge to quit and to
just keep fighting a little
more I know you would do anything for us
but now the table's turn it's time for
you to watch your commitment pay
off we will be your soldiers through
this battle from taking a greater role
with mamamo day to extra work of any
sort to be
coming to becoming the leader that you
make us believe we can be is
done so Sid give us a bit of perspective
here um in your book you quoted uh a
Fortune Magazine cover I think from uh
the mid 1930s
that more um we just need the scientific
and political will to move us into the
next phase of cancer research and
therapy which we are lacking right now
now um we know more about uh how to
understand cancer at a molecular and
genetic level than we have ever known um
obviously this is a Progressive Field
but that there is Lucidity and clarity
about many of the F not all but many of
the fundamental features of a global
problem that Lucidity and clarity about
mechanism about understanding what
causes and what how the causes actually
affect themselves in cellular bi ology
um need to be now translated into
mechanisms of finding new medicines and
prevent and treat cancer to prevent and
treat cancer excuse me um and that
transition is where we're sitting on
right now and while we're undergoing
that transition we seem to have lost a
national and international will to
enable that transition politically
financially and in terms of being able
to support research in the longer run
and that's the problem we could talk
very specifically about what we know
about cancer today that well maybe just
um you know compared to 80 years ago if
somebody does get a diagnosis of cancer
today and I know it's an odd way to ask
the question but if you are diagnosed
with cancer what are the better cancers
to be diagnosed with um well just to
give you one example let's take a very
concrete example 80 years ago if you had
breast cancer as a woman Lori Wilson to
take an example you had breast cancer as
a woman the the primary modality of
treatment may be to hide you away in the
attic and not talk about cancer the
secondary modality of treatment might be
to refer you to someone like William sto
holstead you travel to Baltimore come
back with an excavation of your chest be
unable to move your right arm or left
arm depending on the circumstances and
really be confined back into the attic
because now you were disabled from the
surgery itself your life may have been
saved by that process um 80 years later
we now know we have a host modalities
beginning from surgery and radiation
therapy to remove the primary tumor from
the breast starting next with hormonal
therapies if you happen to have that
variant of cancer that would prevent a
relapse of cancer and probably extend
your life by 5 to seven years followed
by a secondary therapy secondary
hormonal therapies which will again
increase your lifespan by 5 to seven
years um followed by long-term
surveillance uh for potential recurrence
of of disease now you could say well
what does that mean
it means that we think this it's hard
numbers to put down but we think we have
extended the lifespan of a woman with
locally Advanced Breast Cancer by on the
order of 12 to 15 years so if you were
diagnosed at 50 um in you know
1922 um you have extended your life by
12 vital years from 50 to 62 these are
reasonable numbers it's hard to know
exactly what the numbers are these are
reasonable numbers um it is also meant
that because of the combination of all
Therapeutics um we have managed to
decrease the mortality rate from breast
cancer mortality rate as I have
discussed in the book is a very hard
number it's a tough statistic because
it's real unlike diagnosis rates which
seems to increase and decrease depending
on how effectively you're diagnosing Etc
the mortality rate is a real number and
we've managed to decrease the mortality
rate from breast cancer by about 1%
every year starting since the 1980s and
you would say who cares about 1% every
year well it's 24 25 years since then
and that number has decreased the
mortality rate of breast cancer ages
justice has decreased by about 25 to 30%
that's an an amazing accomplishment um
and we should be very proud of that
accomplishment in contrast the mortality
rate of locally Advanced or metastatic
pancreatic cancer has change zero right
in that same period of time so um so
that is just to give a sense of the
spectrum um the mortality rate of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia children's
leukemia has gone basically from 100% to
about uh uh 10 odd percent in that same
span of time from the 1980s to 19 to
2015 you know 90% of children are cured
they have some long-term complications
of that cure but those are but those
that gives you some of the spectrum of
numbers do you want to talk a little bit
bit about where you've turned your
attention more recently and what the
what what your you have two new books
out I think one shorter than the other
but um to talk about both of those I
have a small book coming out a short
book coming out um never call books
small they get insulted uh I have a
short book but worth every
penny worth every penny that's right I
have a short book coming out um uh which
is called the laws of medicine um and it
was inspired actually by a book that I
read when I was um an undergraduate
actually brought me into medicine in the
first place which was uh leis Thomas's
astonishing uh the youngest science um L
Thomas wrote
two small books no short books uh the
lives of the cell and the youngest
science both of which I recommend to
everyone every medical and other student
I think people in the humanities should
read both these books because they're
about the future of of of uh of future
of the future um the youngest science
was the name of that book leou Thomas is
astonishing book and he wrote about the
idea that medicine is the youngest
science um following the lineage of
physics and chemistry and biology into
medicine and the question that I tried
to raise in my new book which is called
the laws of medicine is if medicine is
the youngest science then if all
Sciences should have laws what are the
laws of medicine um and I'll leave it at
that so you can uh uh it'll be out in
October um what are the laws of Medicine
just a teaser is that it turns out that
all of them are really laws of
uncertainty they're laws of the ways we
manage or practice uh information under
profound uncertainty and that's one of
the to me one of the most interesting
problems about medicine there's lots of
information there's lots of uncertainty
how do you combine these things together
in a way that makes sense for an
individual human being um that's the
that's I think and a large part of it um
it's U it's an evocation of one of the
most important intellectuals of the 20th
century who didn't live in the 20th
century named Thomas baz um who
discovered a one of the fundamental laws
about how we think about uncertainty
probably one of the most important laws
that governs the way we practice
economics or stock broking statistics
Bas and statistics and the book is
dedicated to Thomas Bay now what what
about the other book does it so and then
I have another book The the laws of
medicine was really an essay that was
sitting in the in in the drawer for a
long time someone asked for it and I
said I'd modify the essay and that's how
it became I'm not I'm not writing two
books at the same time please don't you
know please don't get the wrong
impression that I you know sort of move
from one book to another book like
playing Rak manov or something two hands
um the other book which I've been
working for a while um is a history of
the gene um as a 20th century idea um it
seems to me that we've arrived at an
extraordinary time in the future of
identity in the future of self um in the
future of being able to uh change uh and
understand what our genes mean to
ourselves and we need to take this idea
very seriously it's not to say an absurd
thing which is to say genes explain
everything genes explain Etc it's you
know all human attributes but it's to
take the idea very very seriously that
there is more in individual genomes than
we have ever understood um and that
individual genomes govern our sense of
self more deeply and more provocatively
than we have ever understood and that
manipulating those those can causes can
can therefore cause changes allow us to
intervene on human fate Destiny and
identity in a way that we had not
expected um if we are to take that idea
seriously we need to know just like
cancer we need to know where that idea
comes from how much of it is real um and
how much of is going to H how much of
this is going to happen in the future um
just to give you one brief
sense of how extraordinary uh the how
extraordinarily the technology has moved
forward um to make a directed change in
the human genome so the human genome has
three billion letters of DNA you know if
you were to open it as an encyclopedia
it would read AC g gtt g g g a g g g CT
CG CG so forth for 33 volumes of the
entire encyclopedia so 33 entire
encyclopedias stretched out over time
time
now we now have the capacity based on
work done over the last five 10 years 5
years we now have the capacity of
entering that
encyclopedia in a cell and changing one
letter of that encyclopedia so we can
make one change we can erase out one
word or one letter in that encyclopedia
and switch it for another word you can
imagine how powerful that technology
could be or would be if used
appropriately to cure diseases
complicated genetic diseases cancer
schizophrenia autism um but how
complicated that same technology can be
and will be if that's used to direct it
in the wrong ways um to change fate in
ways that we never expected to change
fate to change identity in ways we never
expected to change identity so it I
think it really comes uh it it becomes
uh it becomes morally as well as
biologically evident that we need really
think about how we got here this is
another history that we need to um have
a you know have a Reckoning with and
that's and is this book called the
empress um you know I thought a long
time about if you have a title you can
you can come to me and tell me and I'll
give you a
prize the book's not been i title my
books at the end um and when will it be
out um we're looking for a day it's done
I'm looking for a public it's now called
um I I thought that maybe we should just
be given the size of the top topic it
would be just called simply the Gene and
intimate history um and it has it begins
with an advocation of a genetic disease
that has affected my own family um which
is why it's an intimate history and it
ends with my family again it's a family
history it's about ourselves it's about
myself um I um I'm thinking April May
sometime good I look forward to it maybe
if we have the lights up I'm sure there
are lots of questions uh from the
more of
you looking back a 100 years after
Hallstead it's easy to be horrified by
the radical surgery that he pioneered
and perhaps perfected in a sense but I
also feel from your book and from the
clip that there's a great deal of
admiration that you have for Hallstead
so that he's really something of a
tragic hero would you agree with that
and do you feel that in some ways those
who are at the Forefront of treating
patients and conducting research today
are perhaps one day also going to be
tragic Heroes those are very important
questions
um the the quick answer is of course I
mean every person used to really see on
this film uh including um some of the
patients who allowed themselves to be
exposed in this very vulnerable way are
all tragic Heroes um they're Heroes
first the tragedies come later um but
they all tragic Heroes they're very
important people they Mark the march of
History U if it weren't for them the
they would not be marking the march of
History so so we know that that's the
case and there's a question that's asked
in the middle of the film which um you
know one of the great um leukemia
doctors um Emil frich who's at
Texas um asks very blankly you know he
invented the he invented the therapy
that has saved the lives of these 90%
leukemic children who would die
otherwise
um and he says brankle he said at one
point of time I said to myself how far
would you go what is the limit of how
far you'd go with human experimentation
um what are the what are the gaps and
the guidelines that you have because
you're working on human beings but on
the other hand there's a capacity to
bring alive transformative Technologies
there is no simple answer to that
question it has it's a very case toase
basis you have to use um your internal
moral compasses uh to guide through it
but there are also now as you know very
well know we've invented institutions to
help us keep those moral compasses at
Bay um it's a beautiful invention um
there are there's this infrastructure
that we've surrounded medicine with the
problem is of course that sometimes that
infrastructure tips over in the wrong
direction and it becomes too
self-enclosed and so the most radical
forms of therapy are actually inhibited
and finding that spot finding that right
sweet spot um is an exquisitely
important problem but it's an Exquisite
problem it's there's no formula um and
in fact now that you're talking about it
one piece of the laws of medicine is
that finding that
spot how will the microbiome data the
recent
data play into future cancer
research uh it's um interesting idea the
the idea being very just State the
question how we now know that uh you
know now that although we have a single
body we're actually inhabited by
millions of other bodies uh the idea
being that in inside our guts inside our
mouths there are literally several
hundred million bacterial species that
are growing with us in a commensal way
these bacterial species grow up during
our lifetime they keep our gut Flora
populated and we basically have
neglected them for for the last you know
200 years of Medicine
um and now the question has been raised
I mean could these other things that are
living within our our bodies could they
play a role in metabolic diseases could
they play a role in cancer and other
questions like that the field is in its
infancy and there's a lot of hype around
it um I think that uh there's there's
very strong evidence that for metabolic
diseases including obesity and diabetes
among them very strongly um that there's
a link between um gut flora and uh
cancer sorry and these metabolic
diseases um the bigger question is
whether uh number one whether there's a
link in cancer and number two can this
become technology you know we're all
interested in technology can this become
technology can you now manipulate the
Flora of the gut to try to change the
way you become predisposed to diabetes
or inflammatory bowel diseases so these
are high in that list cancer is a little
bit low in that list um you know mental
health I would say mental illnesses are
relatively lower even on that list and
we just have to go through thoughtfully
uh figuring out all those pieces and
figuring out whether there'll be
technology that comes out of
it the question comes about Extreme
Measures right when uh the battle may be
almost
lost um but there may be more things to
do who gets to make the decision who
gets to foot the bill um who gets to
make the moral uh
determination well so the F the first
answer to the question is I mean at
least the the load star answer that is
quite obvious the patient gets to make
that decision so the load star answer is
the simple answer right the load star
answer is look that we have a strong
Line in the Sand about who gets to make
that decision and how that decision gets
gets to be made but in fact that's also
a relatively empty answer in real life
we know anyone who's really experienced
any devastating illness knows that first
of all the idea that the physician is
not a paternalist paternalistic
character is fundamentally flawed people
medicine has always been paternalistic
or maternalistic the gender doesn't
matter but its capacity to stand in for
decisions uh on behalf of other people
is undeniable so we might as well sort
of fess up to that idea and and confront
it so now that now that that elephant is
in the room we need to find a we've
tried very hard to make this decision
consensually and collaboratively um and
there's a clear consensus in medicine
that at least within the United States
that decision has now been has moved way
the pendulum has swung quite far in One
Direction and we need to find a way to
bring it backwards and by that I mean
the following which is that you know um
the we are overtreating many many many
cancer patients um um and uh there's a
recent in fact today there was a
strikingly uh striking article in the
New York Times of a of a place in
California where they've concentrated on
a different model of hospice care I
encourage people to read it um which
involves more kind of a more celebrated
death um there are these things called
Death with dinner conversations that
we're having now hopefully we'll have in
the future where we can figure out how
to make plans for our own demise now
that is not to say that we still need to
counteract some of the fundamental
nihilism that comes with cancer um and
if if we don't do that then our uh the
technology that allows us to live more
fruitful better longer lives but really
more fruitful and Better Lives more
dignified lives and secondarily longer
lives um does not need to be moved
forward it does uh there's a long long
way to go um there are still ways in
which we are falling backwards um on
being able to deliver the correct
therapy for a 50-year-old woman with
breast cancer so I think both these
conversations need to be carried out at
the same time and we're trying to do
that somewhat unsuccessfully I I have a
final question s um since our old too
brief time is up which is just reading
your book and thinking about it just a
little bit is it healthy for anyone who
is um touched with cancer acquainted
with cancer or uh related to somebody
confronting the disease to encourage
them when they go to see their doctor to
think of themselves is an
outlier interesting question um you know
every this is this is the this is the
famous Garrison keiller problem right so
um the uh the um you know everyone is an
outlier and everyone's above average so
we have a natural uh tendency to think
of ourselves as Invincible
um the the important idea I think that's
contained in your question very
important important question is to
figure out the How Deeply or in what
context we understand ourselves as
outliers um each one of us is a
psychological or psychic outlier that's
because the psyche identity self is a
variant a unique variant of itself um
but on the other hand we share vast
amounts of physiology with each other uh
in fact we share vast amounts of
physiology with chimpanzees um so and
with laboratory mice so there is of
course a correct answer which tells us
that you know you're not going to be an
outl in other words if you expose
yourself to certain carcinogens chances
are that you will get acquir the cancer
caused by those carcinogens and
therefore you're not an outlier in that
sense you may be statistically an
outlier because you've smoked all your
life and at 85 you haven't had lung
cancer in which case you were a
statistical outlier we had no tools and
I'll stop right here at the last last
point we had no Tools 10 years ago to be
able to assess these outliers we didn't
have enough tools we didn't have enough
technology
and
we look like um in this universe well
Sid on behalf of all of us thank you
very much indeed
[Applause]